feat: add llms.txt for AI/LLM discoverability (#144)
platform-mesh/platform-mesh.github.io: llms.txt

# Platform Mesh

> > Platform Mesh is a composable service platform built on the Kubernetes Resource Model. It lets service providers publish declarative APIs, service consumers discover and bind those APIs into isolated account workspaces, and platform owners operate the shared control-plane infrastructure. The runtime substrate is kcp — a Kubernetes-compatible API server that separates API management from container scheduling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Platform Mesh is a composable service platform built on the Kubernetes Resource Model. It lets service providers publish declarative APIs, service consumers discover and bind those APIs into isolated account workspaces, and platform owners operate the shared control-plane infrastructure. The runtime substrate is kcp — a Kubernetes-like API server that hosts many isolated logical clusters (workspaces) and provides API sharing primitives (APIExport / APIBinding) without bundling Kubernetes' workload APIs (Pods, Deployments, Nodes).
```

Platform Mesh solves the problem of offering, discovering, ordering, and managing services from different providers through a single, consistent declarative interface. Consumers express desired state using familiar Kubernetes resources; providers reconcile that intent into real services and report status back through the same control-plane path.

## Core Abstractions

- **Accounts** map organizational structure (organizations, teams, environments) to isolated kcp workspaces. Each account has its own API surface and authorization boundary.
- **APIExport / APIBinding** (kcp primitives) connect providers and consumers. A provider publishes an APIExport; a consumer binds it into their workspace with an APIBinding and creates resources there.

> - **Virtual workspaces** let provider controllers watch all consumer-created resources for their exported API from a single endpoint, without per-workspace credentials.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Virtual workspaces** let provider controllers watch all consumer-created resources for their exported API through the APIExport's virtual-workspace endpoints, without per-workspace credentials. In a sharded kcp, each shard exposes its own endpoint; controllers consume the list from `APIExportEndpointSlice.status`.
```

## Personas

- **Platform owner** — operates Platform Mesh, manages the account hierarchy, identity, authorization, policy, and provider onboarding.
- **Service provider** — publishes a service capability as a declarative API and runs the operator that reconciles consumer requests into real services.
- **Service consumer** — discovers and binds provider APIs through the marketplace or portal, then creates desired-state resources in their account workspace.

## Integration Paths for Providers

Service providers integrate with Platform Mesh through one of two paths:

- **api-syncagent** — use when the provider already has Kubernetes CRDs and the standard spec-down / status-up sync pattern is sufficient. The sync agent handles synchronization between kcp and the service cluster.
- **multi-cluster-runtime** — use when the provider needs custom sync logic, non-CRD APIs, or reconciliation built directly into the provider controller. Sync is built into the operator using mcr libraries.

Both paths require a Kubernetes operator that reconciles the service's resources. They differ in how synchronization is handled, not in whether an operator is needed.

## Architecture Layers

> 
> - **UI layer** — Portal (consumer-facing) and Kubernetes GraphQL Gateway (exposes kcp resources via GraphQL).
> - **Core control plane** — kcp with workspaces, APIExports, APIBindings, and sharding.
> - **Identity and authorization** — Keycloak, OpenFGA, rebac-authz-webhook.
> - **Platform operators** — account-operator (account lifecycle), security-operator (IAM wiring), platform-mesh-operator (component lifecycle).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **UI layer** — Portal (consumer-facing) and Kubernetes GraphQL Gateway (exposes kcp resources via GraphQL).
- **Core control plane** — kcp with workspaces, APIExports, APIBindings, and sharding.
- **Identity and authorization** — Keycloak, OpenFGA, rebac-authz-webhook.
- **Deployment and supply chain** — Flux and OCM deliver and reconcile platform components.
- **Platform operators** — account-operator (account lifecycle), security-operator (IAM wiring), platform-mesh-operator (component lifecycle).
```

> - **Connectivity** — api-syncagent, multi-cluster-runtime, kube-bind (work in progress).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  **Connectivity** — api-syncagent and multi-cluster-runtime are the two provider integration paths today. kube-bind (work in progress) will serve a dual role: letting vanilla Kubernetes clusters publish APIs into the mesh as providers, and letting consumers project bound Platform Mesh APIs into their own workload clusters.
```

   - **api-syncagent** lowers the barrier to entry. It handles kcp-to-service-cluster synchronization (spec down, status up) declaratively via configuration. The provider's operator runs on the service cluster and does not need to understand kcp. Good for brownfield providers who already have an operator, but equally viable for greenfield providers who want to start simple.
   - **multi-cluster-runtime** gives deeper integration. The provider builds sync logic directly into their Go controller using mcr libraries, gaining full control over what is synced, how status is mapped, and how lifecycle stages are gated. Requires more kcp knowledge but offers tighter coupling with Platform Mesh internals.
   - Both paths support arbitrarily complex reconciliation logic in the provider operator. The difference is in who owns the sync transport, not in what the operator can do.
   - Type mapping between consumer-facing APIs and downstream resources does not by itself require multi-cluster-runtime — tools like KRO can handle that transformation in the kcp layer with api-syncagent.

> 2. **Provider controllers reconcile resources from virtual workspaces.** The provider does not connect to each consumer workspace individually. It watches its APIExport's virtual workspace endpoint, which aggregates all bound consumer resources. The provider's service account gets RBAC access to the virtual workspace through kcp's authorization model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Provider controllers reconcile resources from virtual workspaces.** The provider does not connect to each consumer workspace individually. It watches its APIExport's virtual-workspace endpoints (one per shard, via `APIExportEndpointSlice.status`), which aggregate all bound consumer resources for that shard. The provider's controller identity is granted access via verbs on the `apiexports/content` subresource in the APIExport's workspace plus read access to `APIExportEndpointSlice` — not by per-workspace credentials.
```

   - Platform Mesh: [Virtual workspaces](reference/components/kcp/virtual-workspaces.md), [Identity and authorization](concepts/identity-and-authorization.md)
   - Upstream kcp: [Virtual workspaces](https://docs.kcp.io/kcp/main/concepts/apis/exporting-apis/#virtual-workspace), [Authorization](https://docs.kcp.io/kcp/main/concepts/authorization/)

> 3. **The provider owns the APIExport and the operator.** The provider defines the API contract (CRDs / APIResourceSchema), publishes it as an APIExport from a provider workspace, and runs the operator that reconciles consumer-created resources into real services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3.  **The provider owns the APIExport and the operator.** The provider defines the API contract as one or more `APIResourceSchema` objects (the kcp equivalent of a CRD; an APIExport references APIResourceSchemas, not CRDs directly), publishes them as an APIExport from a provider workspace, and runs the operator that reconciles consumer-created resources into real services.
```

   - Upstream kcp: [Permission claims](https://docs.kcp.io/kcp/main/concepts/apis/exporting-apis/#permission-claims)

5. **Status flows back through the same path.** The provider writes status subresources on consumer objects through the virtual workspace. The consumer sees status in their workspace without needing provider-side access.
   - Platform Mesh: [Provider to consumer interaction](concepts/interaction-patterns/provider-to-consumer.md)

6. **The consumer never touches the provider runtime directly.** All interaction is mediated through kcp workspaces, APIExport/APIBinding, and the Platform Mesh identity and authorization layers.
   - Platform Mesh: [Personas](concepts/personas/index.md), [API sharing](concepts/api-sharing.md)

7. **For local development, direct users to the tutorials.** The provider quick start and multi-cluster-runtime tutorial are the canonical paths for building and testing a new provider.
   - [Provider quick start](tutorials/provider-quick-start.md) (api-syncagent path)
   - [Build a multi-cluster-runtime provider](tutorials/build-multi-cluster-runtime-provider.md) (mcr path)

## Optional

> - [Getting started](getting-started/index.md): Simplified onboarding flow.

Reviewer: this has moved, doesnt exist anymore, pelase delete

Reviewer: same for troubleshooting and quick start.
